---
layout: protocols
title: Isolation of salivary gland epithelial buds
author: Shaohe Wang
author_url: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=R_-kJV4AAAAJ&hl=en
date: 2021-10-12
---

Up to 6 intact salivary glands (see Salivary gland isolation and culture) were treated with 150 mL 2 units/mL dispase (Thermo Fisher, 17105041; diluted in DMEM/F-12) in a well of a Pyrex spot plate (Fisher Scientific 13-748B) for 15 min at 37?C. The glands were washed twice with 5% BSA (MilliporeSigma, A8577; diluted in DMEM/F-12) in the same well to quench the dispase activity. The mesenchyme of each gland was removed using a pair of forceps (Fine Science Tools, 11254-20) and a tungsten needle (Fine Science Tools, 10130-05 and 26016-12) under a dissecting microscope. The forceps were mostly used to hold the gland still, whereas the needle was gently inserted between the mesenchyme and epithelium to separate them. Isolated epithelial rudiments were transferred to a new well of the spot plate with 150 mL DMEM/F-12 medium using low-retention pipette tips (cut for larger opening; Rainin, 30389190). When needed, a pair of forceps was used to cut off single epithelial buds from the isolated epithelial rudiments.

Mouse submandibular salivary glands were isolated at embryonic day 12 or 13 (E12 or E13) as previously described (Sequeira et al., 2013). Briefly, a scalpel (Fine Science Tools, 10011-00 and 10003-12) was used to decapitate the mouse embryo. While the detached head was held on its side with one prong of forceps (Fine Science Tools, 11251-20) pierced through the top, a scalpel was used to slice across the mouth opening to isolate the mandible and tongue, between which the submandibular glands were sandwiched. Under a dissecting microscope, the detached mandible tissue was placed on a glass plate with the tongue facing down. A pair of forceps was used to slice through the midline of the mandible tissue to expose the tongue and the two submandibular glands attached to the base of the tongue. After surrounding tissues were removed, glands were detached using forceps and collected into a 35-mm dish with 3 mL DMEM/F-12 (Thermo Fisher, 11039047) medium until all embryos were dissected. Isolated salivary glands were cultured on 13 mm diameter 0.1 mm pore polycarbonate filters (MilliporeSigma, WHA110405) floating on 200 mL Organ Culture Medium in the glass bottom area of a 50 mm MatTek dish (MatTek, P50G-1.5-14-F) at 37?C with 5% CO2. Organ Culture Medium was DMEM/F-12 supplemented with 150 mg/mL vitamin C (MilliporeSigma, A7506), 50 mg/mL transferrin (MilliporeSigma, T8158) and 1 3 PenStrep (100 units/mL penicillin, 100 mg/mL streptomycin; Thermo Fisher, 15140163).
